WIP: Kernel developers tutorial for DAL (#257)
trilitech/tezos-developer-docs: docs/tutorials/build-files-archive-with-dal.md

---
title: Implementing a Files Archive with the DAL and a Smart Rollup
authors: 'Tezos Core Developers'
last_update:
  date: 10 January 2024
---

The Data-Availability Layer (DAL) is an exciting feature expected to reach
Tezos’ Mainnet in 2024, and it is arguably [the missing piece to complete the
Tezos’ Layer 2
landscape](https://research-development.nomadic-labs.com/data-availability-layer-tezos.html).
In essence, the DAL is a companion peer-to-peer network for the Tezos

> blockchain, designed to provide additional bandwidth to Smart Rollups. True to

Reviewer: Addressed here: https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/commits/246d80bb83fb9fb8cdab74c57cfa0948fc321b4c

Tezos ethos, the DAL is decentralized (anyone can join and participate to the
network) and permissionless (anyone can post data to the network), and its
security is entrusted to Tezos’ ~400 bakers.

> In this article, we will see how it becomes possible to build a “files archive:”

Reviewer 2: obsolete in #264

developer portal](https://tezos.com/developers/smart-rollups).
:::

## Why the DAL?

The DAL has earned the nickname “Rollup Booster,” from its ability to address
the last bottleneck Smart Rollups developers could not overcome without
sacrificing decentralization: block space. See, Smart Rollups offload
*computation* from Layer 1, but the transactions they process still need to
originate from somewhere.

By default, that “somewhere” is the Layer 1’s blocks, yet the size of a Tezos’
block is limited to around 500KBytes. In this model, while Smart Rollups do not
compete for Layer 1 gas anymore, they still compete for block space and this
does not scale very well, does it?

Additionally, a Smart Rollup can fetch data from an additional source called the
“reveal channel,” which allows to retreive arbitrary data from its Blake2B hash.
The reveal channel is a pretty powerful primitive, as it allows Smart Rollups
operator to post hashes instead of full blown data onto the Layer 1. But it is a
double-edge sword, because nothing enforces the availability of the data in the
first place. [Solutions exist to address this

> challenge](https://research-development.nomadic-labs.com/introducing-data-availability-committees.html),

Reviewer: Updated links here: https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/commits/9bcbd7f98928af6f40d86b66d88803a899d2385e

but they are purely off-chain ones, coming with no guarantee from Layer 1.

Enters the DAL. Without entering too much into the details, the DAL is here for
third-parties to publish data, and the bakers attest they did. Once attested,
said data can be retreived by the Smart Rollup, without the need for
additional trusted third-parties.

## The Big Picture

Before diving into the code, we will first take a moment to understand how our
files archive will work. It can be broken down into 6 steps: 

1. Users can post their file directly to the DAL, through a DAL node (they can
   use one set-up by third-parties, or start their own). They get some kind of
   certificate back (comprising a “commitment” and a “proof”).
2. They post this certificate to Layer 1 with an Octez client. The operation is
   way cheaper than effectively posting the file directly.
3. Following the creation of a block containing the certificate, a subset of
   Tezos’ bakers tries to download the file from the DAL, and if they succeed
   they attest it with a dedicated operation. They have a certain number of

>    blocks to do so, and if they don’t by the end of this period, the certificate

Reviewer: Isn't "block levels" redundant?

  every execution step of a Smart Rollup needs to be provable to the Layer 1 in
  order for the refutation game to work, breaking down a slot into smaller
  pieces (pages, in this case) is necessary.
- To attest that a slot has been published, bakers have some time which is expressed as a number of blocks. This number is `attestation_lag`.

Let’s revisit the Big Picture with this additional knowledge, in order to refine
it. Step 1 does not change: users keep posting data to DAL nodes, and get back
“certificates” they can forward to Layer 1. However, when they do (that is, step
2), they have to specify which slot they want to “fill” with their data, using
its index (from $0$ to $\mathrm{number\_of\_slots} - 1$). Since the DAL is a
permissionless network, any user can try to fill any slot. If two users compete
to use the same slot in the same Tezos block, the first operation of the block
wins the slot (leaving the baker creating the block the ultimate judge in the
matter).

So, to summarize:

- A slot for and index $I$ is published at a Tezos level $L$.
- Bakers responsible for attesting the slot $I$ have $\mathrm{attestation\_lag}$ blocks
  to do so.

> - After $\mathrm{attestation\_lag}$ block, either the slot is indexed (if enough

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- After $\mathrm{attestation\_lag}$ blocks, either the slot is indexed (if enough
```

  bakers have published the expected operation) or it is dropped and will never
  be accessible to Smart Rollups.

> - Every attested slots can be retreived by a kernel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- All the attested slots can be retreived by a kernel.
```

As of January, 2024, Weeklynet’s DAL has 32 slots of 65KBytes usable per Tezos
block. You do not have to take my word for it, though. We can deploy a kernel on
Weeklynet to make sure of it.

Add this contents to `src/lib.rs`.

```rust
use tezos_smart_rollup::{kernel_entry, prelude::*};

pub fn entry<R: Runtime>(host: &mut R) {
    let param = host.reveal_dal_parameters();
    debug_msg!(host, "{:?}\n", param);
}

kernel_entry!(entry);
```

We can build it using Cargo.

```bash
cargo build --release --target wasm32-unknown-unknown
cp target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/files_archive.wasm .
```

:::note The Smart Rollup does not support the DAL
As of today, the Smart Rollup Installer does not support DAL as a
Data-Availability solution. This means we will need to rely on the reveal
channel to initialize our Smart Rollup correctly (which is not ideal for a
decentralized files archive).
:::

We will use `_rollup_node/` as the data directory for our rollup node.

```bash
cargo install tezos-smart-rollup-installer
export PATH="${HOME}/.local/bin:${PATH}"
smart-rollup-installer get-reveal-installer \
    -P _rollup_node/wasm_2_0_0 \
    -u files_archive.wasm \
    -o installer.hex
```

> To deploy it, we need an implicit account of Weeklynet with enough tez.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To deploy it, we need an implicit account on Weeklynet with enough tez.
```

attested).

Doesn’t that make you curious?

We can modify our kernel to try to fetch the slot at index 0 for every Tezos
block. This requires to setup a DAL node of our own, but fortunately, it is
relatively straightforward. But we do need to understand what we are doing for
it to work.

In essence, the DAL relies on sharding to scale. Not every participant of the
network needs to download every data published there. On the contrary,
participants subscribe to certain slots indexes, and they will never have to
fetch data coming from slots they are not subscribed to. The same goes for
bakers by the way: they are assigned a subset of slots (whose size depends on
their stake) by the protocol.

Anyway, it means that when we start a DAL node, we decide to which slots index
they are subscribed to with the `--producer-profiles` command line argument. In
our case, we will first subscribe to the slot index 0.

```bash
octez-dal-node --endpoint ${ENDPOINT} \
    --producer-profiles=0 --data-dir _dal_node
```

With a running DAL node, we can come back to our kernel.

What we want to do here is to try to fetch the first page of the slot 0 for

> every new Tezos block. The change in `src/lib.rs` is reasonable.

Reviewer 2: do you mean:
```suggestion
every new Tezos block. The change in `src/lib.rs` is reasonably simple.
```

logged.

### Task 3. Publishing on the DAL

Fetching slots produced by the Tezos core developers in order to verify that the
DAL works as expected on Weeklynet is one thing, but we will not stop there.
The next task for us is to publish data of our own, and to verify our kernel is
indeed able to fetch it.

We will use the slot index 10 for this experiment.

:::note Planning ahead
Before trying to run the code yourself, have a look at Explorus and choose a
slot that is not currently being used.
:::

Kill your DAL node, and restart it with a new `--producer-profiles` argument.

```bash
octez-dal-node --endpoint https://rpc.weeklynet-2024-01-03.teztnets.com \
    --producer-profiles=10 --data-dir _dal_node
```

Then, modify your kernel to read the contents of the 10th slot.

```diff
-    let bytes_read = host.reveal_dal_page(target_level as i32, 0, 0, &mut buffer)?;
+    let bytes_read = host.reveal_dal_page(target_level as i32, 10, 0, &mut buffer)?;
```

Recompile the kernel, and deploy it to Weeklynet. This time, it should not be
able to fetch the content of any slot, because no one is producing them.

#### Hello, World!

> The DAL node exposes a RPC just for that: `POST /slots`, whose body is the

Reviewer 2: Beware, the RPC is called `/slots` here, but `/slot` in the example below. Which one is right?

Reviewer: https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/commits/28ac52563ec512ab334a638f4fb799bcc92db959

contents of the slot. Assuming you did not change the RPC server address,
then publishing a “Hello, world” to the DAL is as simple as:

```bash
curl localhost:10732/slot --data '"Hello, world!"' -H 'Content-Type: application/json'
```

This will return the certificate we mention at the beginning of this article.

```
{
  "commitment": "sh1u3tr3YKPDYUp2wWKCfmV5KZb82FREhv8GtDeR3EJccsBerWGwJYKufsDNH8rk4XqGrXdooZ",
  "commitment_proof":"8229c63b8e858d9a96321c80a204756020dd13243621c11bec61f182a23714cf6e0985675fff45f1164657ad0c7b9418"
}
```

:::warning Use the correct encoding
As hinted by the `Content-Type` header passed to `curl`, it is important that
argument given with `--data` is a valid JSON string. 
:::

> To post this certificate, takes the `commitment` and `commitment_proof` value

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To post this certificate, take the `commitment` and `commitment_proof` value
```

3. Otherwise, we read as many page as necessary to get the full slot.
4. Once it’s done, we store said slot in the durable storage, using the Blake2B
   hash (encoded in hexadecimal) as its key.

We use two additional dependencies for this: `tezos_crypto_rs` for hashing, and
`hex` for encoding.

```diff
+use tezos_crypto_rs::blake2b;
+use tezos_smart_rollup::storage::path::OwnedPath;
 use tezos_smart_rollup::{host::RuntimeError, kernel_entry, prelude::*};
 use tezos_smart_rollup_host::dal_parameters::RollupDalParameters;
```

```diff
 [dependencies]
 tezos-smart-rollup = { version = "0.2.2", features = [ "proto-alpha" ] }
 tezos-smart-rollup-host = { version = "0.2.2", features = [ "proto-alpha" ] }
+tezos_crypto_rs = { version = "0.5.2", default-features = false }
+hex = "0.4.3"
```

:::note
Adding `default-features = false` for `tezos_crypto_rs` is necessary for the
crate to be compatible with Smart Rollups.
:::

Deploy your Smart Rollup again, publish a file, wait for enough levels, and you
should see a line of log giving you the hash used to register the slot.

Assuming you have set the `hash` variable accordingly, then you can check the

> file indeed exists (and later use `hexdump -C` to inspect its contents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
file indeed exists, and later use `hexdump -C` to inspect its contents.
```

```bash
curl "http://localhost:8932/global/block/head/durable/wasm_2_0_0/value?key=/${hash}" \
    -H 'Content-Type: application/octet-stream'
    -o slot.bin
```

:::note Why `diff` won’t work
You cannot use `diff` to ensure the file you originally published and the one
you downloaded from the rollup node are equal. Indeed, they are not: since
the size of a slot is fixed, the DAL node pads the value it receives from

> `POST /slot`. in order to ensure it has the correct size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`POST /slot` in order to ensure it has the correct slot size.
```

Reviewer: https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/commits/3d3753169e376f2709206689a062146ced1a3868

:::

## Conclusion

Our files archive is now completed. At least, the features we wanted to
implement are there: a Smart Rollup storing in its durable storage the slots
attested at a given index.

From there, the sky’s the limit. More features could be implemented, like
having the files publishers pay for the storage they are using in Layer 2 (by
allowing them to deposit tez to the Smart Rollup, and sign the files they
publish). We could also build a frontend to visualize the files published in
our archive. Or, we could deal with the fact that for now, it is not possible

> for a consumer of the file to know it’s original size (we could fix that by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for a consumer of the file to know its original size (we could fix that by
```

---
title: Implementing a Files Archive with the DAL and a Smart Rollup
authors: 'Tezos Core Developers'
last_update:
  date: 10 January 2024
---

The Data-Availability Layer (DAL) is an exciting feature expected to reach
Tezos’ Mainnet in 2024, and it is arguably [the missing piece to complete the
Tezos’ Layer 2
landscape](https://research-development.nomadic-labs.com/data-availability-layer-tezos.html).
In essence, the DAL is a companion peer-to-peer network for the Tezos
blockchain, designed to provide additional bandwidth to Smart Rollups. True to
Tezos ethos, the DAL is decentralized (anyone can join and participate to the
network) and permissionless (anyone can post data to the network), and its
security is entrusted to Tezos’ 400+ bakers.

In this article, we will see how it becomes possible to build a “files archive:”
users will be able to post files to the DAL, and a Smart Rollup will fetch and
index these files. Anyone starting a Smart Rollup node for our archive rollup
will get a copy of the archive. We will be testing our Smart Rollup on
Weeklynet, as [the DAL is already available

> there](https://teztnets.xyz/weeklynet-about).

Reviewer 3: .xyz or .com?

For every Tezos block, the DAL allocates several byte-vectors called *slots*.
The size of a slot and the number of slots available for each Layer 1 block are
parameters of the network. It is possible for a kernel to get access to these
parameters using the `reveal_dal_parameters` function implemented in the
`tezos-smart-rollup-host`.

This function will return a value of the following type.

```rust
pub struct RollupDalParameters {
    pub number_of_slots: u64,
    pub attestation_lag: u64,
    pub slot_size: u64,
    pub page_size: u64,
}
```

In addition of `number_of_slots` and `slot_size`, the two
remaining fields also deserve our attention.

- From the perspective of the Smart Rollup, a slot is divided into _pages_, and
  a kernel can only fetch one page at a time. This is because, depending on the
  size of a slot, it might not be possible to fit it in a Tezos operation. Since
  every execution step of a Smart Rollup needs to be provable to the Layer 1 in
  order for the refutation game to work, breaking down a slot into smaller
  pieces (pages, in this case) is necessary.
- The `attestation_lag` field gives the number of blocks bakers have to attest

>   that a slot has been published onto the DAL.

Reviewer: I changed this to:
> Bakers verify that the data is available and attest that the data is available in their usual block attestations to layer 1. They have a certain number of blocks to do so, known as the _attestation lag_, and if they don't by the end of this period, the certificate is considered bogus and the related data is dropped.

https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/files#diff-884b105a7c433912e6bc2b905b84aef39c0d7ae0a25b28f6c852a5512a682a1cR124

```

We will deploy several (if not many) Smart Rollups in the course of this article.
As such, I suggest you save the following script at the root of your working
directory. It will come handy.

```bash
#!/usr/bin/bash

alias="${1}"

set -e

cargo build --release --target wasm32-unknown-unknown 

rm -rf _rollup_node

cp target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/files_archive.wasm .

smart-rollup-installer get-reveal-installer -P _rollup_node/wasm_2_0_0 \
  -u files_archive.wasm -o installer.hex

octez-client --endpoint ${ENDPOINT} \
  originate smart rollup files_archive from "${alias}" of kind wasm_2_0_0 \
  of type unit with kernel "$(cat installer.hex)" --burn-cap 2.0 --force

octez-smart-rollup-node --endpoint ${ENDPOINT} \
  run observer for files_archive with operators --data-dir _rollup_node \
  --dal-node http://localhost:10732 --log-kernel-debug
```

### Task 2. Fetching Slots from the DAL

DAL is enabled on Weeklynet (otherwise, the `reveal_dal_parameters`
function would not have worked). Some slots (typically the at index 0 and 28)
are used for running regression tests, as witnessed by Explorus’ [dedicated

> page](https://beta.explorus.io/dal) to see the state (absent, published,

Reviewer: Addressed here: https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/commits/ef519357379c373c903fc7db764c23a3f7530ed4

attested).

Doesn’t that make you curious?

We can modify our kernel to try to fetch the slot at index 0 for every Tezos
block. This requires to setup a DAL node of our own, but fortunately, it is
relatively straightforward. But we do need to understand what we are doing for
it to work.

In essence, the DAL relies on sharding to scale. Not every participant of the
network needs to download every data published there. On the contrary,
participants subscribe to certain slots indexes, and they will never have to
fetch data coming from slots they are not subscribed to. The same goes for

> bakers by the way: they are assigned a subset of slots (whose size depends on

Reviewer: Changed this to "When the certificate is confirmed in a block, layer 1 splits the data into shards and assigns those shards to bakers, who verify that the data is available."

https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/files#diff-884b105a7c433912e6bc2b905b84aef39c0d7ae0a25b28f6c852a5512a682a1cR122

and execute the following `octez-client` command:

```bash
commitment="sh1u3tr3YKPDYUp2wWKCfmV5KZb82FREhv8GtDeR3EJccsBerWGwJYKufsDNH8rk4XqGrXdooZ"
proof="8229c63b8e858d9a96321c80a204756020dd13243621c11bec61f182a23714cf6e0985675fff45f1164657ad0c7b9418"
octez-client --endpoint ${ENDPOINT} \
    publish dal commitment "${commitment}" from alice for slot 10 \
    with proof "${proof}"
```

After four blocks, you should see something like that appear in your kernel
logs.

```
RollupDalParameters { number_of_slots: 32, attestation_lag: 4, slot_size: 65536, page_size: 4096 }
Attested slot at index 10 for level 57293: [72, 101, 108, 108, 111, 44, 32, 119, 111, 114]
See you in the next level
```

Checking that these bytes are indeed the first ten characters of the string
`Hello, World!` is left for the readers.

#### Arbitrary Files

The DAL node is not limited to receiving JSON for publishing slots. It is also
possible to send raw bytes with the `application/octet-stream` Content-Type.
In this case, the data needs to be prefixed by its size. It is a bit annoying,
because this information is already contained in the HTML request sent to the

> node, but for now this is the world we are living in.

Reviewer: I trimmed this down to "In this case, you must prefix the data with its size due to limitations of the DAL." We can update than when the UX improves.
https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/files#diff-0a7a21d11152cae324059e321034c998379606cf54fe326c62054b80bfb37942R94

There is only one thing left in order to complete our files archive. We can do
that by modifying the `run` function as follows.

```rust
pub fn run<R: Runtime>(
    host: &mut R,
    param: &RollupDalParameters,
    index: u8,
) -> Result<(), RuntimeError> {
    // Reading one message from the shared inbox is always safe,
    // because the shared inbox contains at least 3 messages per
    // Tezos block.
    let sol = host.read_input()?.unwrap();

    let target_level = sol.level as usize - param.attestation_lag as usize;

    let mut buffer = vec![0u8; param.slot_size as usize];

    let bytes_read = host.reveal_dal_page(target_level as i32, index, 0, &mut buffer)?;

    if bytes_read == 0 {
        debug_msg!(
            host,
            "No attested slot at index {} for level {}\n",
            index,
            target_level
        );

        return Ok(());
    }

    debug_msg!(
        host,
        "Attested slot at index {} for level {}\n",
        index,
        target_level
    );

    let num_pages = param.slot_size / param.page_size;

    for page_index in 1..num_pages {
        let _result = host.reveal_dal_page(
            target_level as i32,

>             index,

Reviewer: https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/commits/0f64d7b4fb7e1e83d5907810c56493be5ed08152

curl "http://localhost:8932/global/block/head/durable/wasm_2_0_0/value?key=/${hash}" \
    -H 'Content-Type: application/octet-stream'
    -o slot.bin
```

:::note Why `diff` won’t work
You cannot use `diff` to ensure the file you originally published and the one
you downloaded from the rollup node are equal. Indeed, they are not: since
the size of a slot is fixed, the DAL node pads the value it receives from
`POST /slot`. in order to ensure it has the correct size.
:::

## Conclusion

Our files archive is now completed. At least, the features we wanted to
implement are there: a Smart Rollup storing in its durable storage the slots
attested at a given index.

From there, the sky’s the limit. More features could be implemented, like
having the files publishers pay for the storage they are using in Layer 2 (by
allowing them to deposit XTZ to the Smart Rollup, and sign the files they
publish). We could also build a frontend to visualize the files published in
our archive. Or, we could deal with the fact that for now, it is not possible
for a consumer of the file to know it’s original size (we could fix that by
modifying the script we use to publish a file to prefix it with its size).

> 

Reviewer 4: Maybe also mention some of the limitations of the archive: it handles at most one file per level and the file size cannot exceed the DAL slot size.

Reviewer: https://github.com/trilitech/tezos-developer-docs/pull/264/commits/c25183f5ccac64203cee88a0480898b5738eae4a
